People trust AI and they trust the
results that they give them. But should
they? Here's a very important question.
If something terrible happens and you
need to ask what are the best cancer
care hospitals on the West Coast, Google
AI or Chat GBT or Perplexity or any of
the others will give you an answer.
There's City of Hope and Fred Hutch and
UCSF.
But did you realize that if you ask
exactly the same question again and
again, you will get a different answer
every time? Not just how the AI answers,
but which ones they choose to put in
what order, which ones are on the list,
how they frame and phrase them.
This is a completely different answer
than what we just saw a second ago and
it is the subject of some really
important research about AI consistency
that we have put together at Spark Toro
with help from my friend friend Patrick
at Gumshu. I want to show you some of
the charts and graphs that we put
together by asking this question and
asking hundreds of people that we
recruited to and surveyed to run the
same prompt over and over and over
again. The variety of responses that you
get is astounding. It is as diverse as
as what I just showed you in Google AI
where first they gave me a list of four
and then they gave me 10 plus. And so I
built a bunch of graphs to show off
exactly what this is. These pink dots on
the scatter plot that's showing the
average number of mentions per response.
So when when it came to cancer care
hospitals, right, cancer hospitals, you
can see that the average number of
mentions from Google AI was over eight,
but when we were asking for LA Volvo
dealerships to chat GPT, it was only
three on average. And the number of
unique answers that you get in these,
211 answers from 99 responses for sci-fi
novels, but only nine Volvo dealerships
across 83 responses in the data set. So,
it can just be all over the place. This,
I think, is the slide that tells the
story the best.
If you want to get two answers that are
exactly the same, you would need to ask
on average Google's AI 124 times to get
the same list. And if you wanted that
same list in the same order, it would be
even more, in fact, three times as many.
For Claude, you'd have to ask more than
1,400 times in order to get the same
list of responses in the same order on
average. And I don't think people
understand this. I don't think users
understand it and I definitely don't
think marketers and brands that want to
track their results understand it. If
you are pitching AI tracking services or
someone is pitching it to you, you need
to understand this response consistency.
This is a big issue of trust and it's an
issue of how to measure it. The
visibility of different results is so
variable that we cannot trust one run,
two runs, even five or 10 runs of the
same prompt. You need a 100 plus to be
able to get a truly representative
measure of how you're performing for a
particular prompt consistently. And this
data tells a very compelling story about
exactly that. There is a whole bunch of
detail in the report, but but before I
let you go, I just want to bring up one
more critical thing because you might be
thinking to yourself, okay, Rand, I can
see how, you know, maybe City of Hope
was in a ton of these responses. I
recognize it was in only one of the two
Google responses that we just looked at.
But
on average, there is a way to see
visibility.
If you've been paying attention though,
you're probably thinking to yourself,
"Wait a minute, Rand, this is for
exactly the same prompt run hundreds of
times by a panel of users. What if what
if those prompts aren't always the
same?" And you're absolutely right to
ask that. Absolutely right to ask that
because do two people ever use the same
language when running an AI prompt? We
asked. We asked people to pretend they
were trying to find the best headphone
options for a gift to a family member.
and the list of responses that we got
142 different ones. Every single prompt
was different. In fact, it was so
different so different that I I created
this uh semantic similarity heat map
using uh pair-wise correlation, which
which is a a sort of scientific measure
of the difference between two sets, two
pieces of text. Similarity is like
Kungpow chicken and peanut butter. Yes,
core ingredients are similar. Yes,
they're both food. Yes, you can eat
them. Yes, they're both served in the
United States, but hm, not not really
the same at all. And so this led us down
this wormhole of asking more questions,
doing more research, and figuring out
exactly the answer. And our conclusions
are that AIs almost never give the same
brands or recommendations. They almost
never give the same list in the same
order. These tools are probability
engines. If you want to measure AI
responses and your position in them, it
is reasonable to do so with that sort of
dartboard like pattern of visibility
percentage, assuming you're running the
reports often enough and and uh many
many times over. But if someone's giving
you your ranking position in AI, that is
complete baloney. And if they're
expecting that every human being is
crafting prompts similarly, that is
total crap, too. the results change
dramatically depending on what exactly
you ask. And so that semantic similarity
metric has to be in there to be able to
do it. I hope people are going to follow
up on this research. I hope you'll check
out the full research report, but
hopefully this overview has been
edifying and you'll make better
decisions around your usage and trust of
AIS in the future and certainly how you
track your brand or advise people to
track their brands in AI tools.